so last week my five-year-old graduated
from preschool
to celebrate yeah yeah give it up maisie
uh to celebrate i took her to a toy
store we walked in and i said you can
pick out anything in the store that you
want
i think it was both the most exciting
moment of her life
and the most terrifying
i think this is a pretty decent analogy
to pricing
why is pricing so hard
in sas
today i'm going to talk about a few
things that i've learned along the way
and hopefully leave you with at least
one thing you can learn and go and
implement in your businesses
but ultimately
the reason sas pricing is so hard is
because there are an unlimited amount of
opportunities in the way that we do
these things right there's plg there's
freemium there's free trials
ultimately we're selling a product that
has very low marginal cost which makes
pricing opportunities almost limitless
it really is confounding that pricing
can be such a massive opportunity
for us as businesses
but it's so complicated that it quickly
becomes very very overwhelming
simon kutcher did a survey a couple
years ago uh of private equity firms
that had looked at different value
creating initiatives
and i've seen other surveys that have
similar outcomes pricing is generally
considered one of the most impactful
things that we can be doing
but we're consistently not spending a
lot of time on it profitwell a few years
ago had a study that showed that over
the lifetime of a business
they
people
generally spend only six hours
researching and understanding their
pricing so we really live in this world
where there's this massive opportunity
we don't spend a lot of time on it
which leads me to my first takeaway
which is you know i truly believe that
pricing is the most routinely
under-optimized lever in sas
and so today we're going to talk about
two ways to think about pricing they're
strategic and there's tactical
let's jump into the strategic
so first of all
i think that there are four different
types of sas companies
if you think about the price point or
the deal size
relative to your tam
there's kind of these four different
dimensions
if you're selling something in a low
velocity cycle at a low price point and
you're in a relatively constrained
market
this is not a good place to be right you
need to be investing and moving up or to
the right
but if you're in a large horizontal
market with a huge tam and you have a
relatively low price point you need to
be investing and lowering your cac you
need to increase your velocity so as you
think about strategically positioning
your pricing model it needs to
prioritize velocity and reducing
friction
so high price point uh with a small
vertical market think of this like
enterprise sas generally speaking here
you've got to demonstrate a high roi
these are mostly roi based decisions so
you optimize your pricing model around
demonstrating how the price that's being
paid is coming back in the in the form
of business value or roi
and then lastly large horizontal markets
where you're primarily selling large
deal sizes
this is about innovation right these are
really generally speaking rapid growing
businesses and as you think about your
pricing model it has to prioritize kind
of growing through innovation and
accelerating kind of the reinvestment
cycle back into your business
so
as you think about these limit unlimited
opportunities and pricing for your sas
you know one of the most common models
that we see
uh is kind of the good better best or
pricing with tiers so i like this
example because i think it articulates
why sas can be so compelling so why do
tiers work so well why does the good
better best model generally speaking
works so well for sas
well it's because you can very
specifically do your pricing and
packaging to target a needs-based
segment
so when you're doing
a tiered pricing model really
effectively each tier is targeting a
specific segment or a persona in your
market
and those segments should be needs based
so the way to think about it is you map
your tears to your personas and you map
your personas to needs
and so if you haven't done a needs-based
analysis that's the first place to start
but ultimately i want you to take away
the fact that
there are unique benefits to selling sas
right these low marginal costs that we
all live in is really unique and special
so make it work for you and how you
think about pricing
so what about things that don't fit in
to tears right or add-ons
i saw this quote recently that really
kind of caps uh kind of encapsulated my
thoughts on the matter which is you know
everything i need is in one tier except
for that one thing and a second tier but
it's not really worth upgrading to that
next tier wow that's a that's a really
poorly designed segmentation if this is
the problem that you're seeing over and
over again so there's really two rules
of thumb when you think about add-ons
the first
in order for you to
charge for an add-on customers have to
understand that there is business value
in that specific feature
if it is a commodity or a uh table
stakes feature
that should not be sold as an add-on
right the second is
um it has to be interesting or
compelling to multiple personas if you
design your tiers targeting a specific
persona or user segment
and an add-on or a feature can kind of
apply in different use cases across
those tiers that's usually a really good
indicator that you should charge it as
an add-on
into your pricing model
let's move on to usage-based billing
right a very hot topic i have a bit of a
contrarian take here which is
usage base is just a new flavor of the
day right what we're really talking
about when we think about usage based
billing is how you define your value
metric
right
the units by which you price your
product
and
you know the most common
value metric
is seats or users and i would argue that
is in essence a version of usage-based
billing right so why is your value
metric so critical
ultimately it's what helps your
customers or your prospects link value
to your price right we all know that
intuitively but if we think about
value-based pricing the value metric is
absolutely key
it ultimately determines how much you
can monetize right
so how do you do it right first thing
you have to do is you have to link the
pricing metric to customer success so
this notion of value has to be defined
by the concept of your customers success
the outcomes that they generate from
using your product
the second is you have to make it simple
so what does that mean right it has to
be easy to understand
easy to estimate and easy to forecast
if you're pricing off of a value metric
that can fluctuate wildly how do you
expect your customers to budget and
forecast at the end of that budget cycle
you're probably in for an unpleasant
surprise
so
when to start thinking about usage-based
billing or usage based pricing
well my view is you know right now uh
but here's the thing you might already
be doing it right so you might already
be using this concept of usage based
billing in a per seat model um
ultimately if the success of the usage
of your product is linked or correlates
with the number of people using the
product in effect you might have the
right usage based metric
this study done by key bank uh i guess
last year shows you know seat based
pricing or use user-based pricing is
still the most common uh and my view is
that this is
probably the right model
for most businesses again it's because
the number of users or seats is
generally very well correlated to the
value that's being delivered
so last takeaway on the strategic piece
here is
that your value metric is the single
most important decision of your pricing
model
if you're having second thoughts or if
it's hard for your customers to link the
value they get from the product to how
much they're paying take another look at
this
let's jump into some tactical things
that you can be doing to improve the way
that you're pricing
so when you look out into the landscape
of kind of pricing thought leadership or
advice
uh i think there's a bunch of different
schools of thought uh i i always like
kind of doing some google searches to
see the newest flavors of the day i
found this one somehow i had not seen
this one until recently but sequoia and
i'll call this the vc approach
you know this is a very academic
approach to pricing which i think can be
really effective a couple things about
this that i really like um you know
first of all the most academic
framework for understanding how you
should price is that it's got to be in
between the cost to serve and deliver
the product and below the willingness to
pay or the perceived value of the
product right pretty intuitive pretty
obvious but if your business doesn't
understand where those bookends are
that's something that's really helpful
to understand so you at least understand
the range that you can play in
the second is this distinction between
horizontal and vertical right and you
can see
in the horizontal segment
that would be where you would apply a
needs-based segmentation analysis and
you would say hey i sell to you know
these different types of segments or
personas and so i'm going to design a
package and a pricing model specific to
that segment
versus a vertical solution right so if
you're selling into the oil and gas
industry
you might be better off going to a
pricing model where people can grow and
expand with you maybe there's a basic
version of the product that can get them
hooked and then you can upsell them to
more premium uh features and
functionality that you introduce at a
later date
one of my favorite thought leaders on
pricing patrick campbell has a different
approach
this spreadsheet is online for free i
love it that he gives away a lot of his
stuff for free effectively what he's
doing here is a version of needs-based
segmentation in a lot of ways so
thinking about the specific
customer segments that you're targeting
and just being very methodical i think a
lot of times people assume everyone is
on the same page with regards to what
these segments are and what they look
like the technographic information etc
putting this down on paper aligning as a
business is really one of the most
powerful things you can do as you go
into a pricing model design
and then you've got the consultant's
answer uh so i will say i i do have a
very strong affinity for both of these
tools uh which if you have the time and
you've got the budget
there's not many things that are going
to help you understand how you should be
pricing than doing a van westendorp
survey effectively that ultimately is
going to help you understand where the
sweet spot is for the price point that
you want to sell at and then a conjoint
survey or a study that can also be
really effective in helping you think
about the trade-offs
when you're doing your pricing and
packaging or designing tiers or things
like that
but all of this to say right there's a
lot of models that you can apply there's
great resources that are online
ultimately though across all of these
there's one single truth and that is the
best best path to pricing excellence
is repeated testing right it doesn't
matter what approach you apply or what
framework you deploy
ultimately the best businesses that are
monetizing to their fullest potential
are doing so by testing repeatedly every
single quarter they're running one small
test right and there's a lot of ways to
do that
and we'll talk about a few more here as
we go on
one of my favorite thought starters when
exploring pricing is you know what would
happen if we increased price
10 20 50 100
um jason limpkin yesterday was talking
about i think it was 60 of the
respondents in the survey cited that
they had raised price in the last year
which was actually quite a bit higher
than i would have expected and i'll
share some more data on what i've seen
in fast springs customer base
in a minute
but this thought starter can be really
compelling to start to unlock the
possibilities that people are just
naturally blocked to explore right so if
you have a senior team to sit down and
say you know what would happen if we did
this and even better yet let's go test
it right let's go test it with a couple
of reps or a couple of deals let's
really understand the price elasticity
in our market and how compelling our
product market fit is you are not going
to understand this in any better way
than to go and test it
and ultimately
you know to get people over the hump to
exploring more creative ways of pricing
because the the truth is
the right answers are not in the
executive team right
the the right answers are with your
customer base and with your prospects
and what they're willing to sign up for
so we recently did a survey or a study
rather with fast spring customers so
fast spring is a
billing and subscription management
solution that powers about 3 000
software companies around the world um
we have some really interesting data on
what's been happening over the past few
years especially with regards to the
inflation that we've seen and now the
more recent market turmoil
and so one thing i want to share with
you is we looked back and we said hey
over the last year how many customers of
ours or software companies in general
have raised price
more than 10 percent
and it was 37
so
interesting that you know jason limpkins
data showed 60 but in general there's a
lot of companies raising price so i
think one thing to kind of give people a
little bit of a kick in the butt here is
you know
be a little bit more aggressive than you
think you need to be right because a lot
of your peers are already doing it and
people understand and are used to having
price increases they see it every day
with all of their vendors
so what happened to these 37 or rather
how much did they increase price
so it does seem to correlate a little
bit with the average price point
across these customers
so this is about 270 global software
companies and you can see the average
price uh increase over the last year you
know grows from 18
for smaller ticket items up to 35
percent for larger items
the other way that we looked about
looked at this is
by b2b and b2c products so similar to
the aov analysis b2b companies are more
likely to have increased price over the
last year but really interesting
the impact
was relatively the same
right so what we looked at is the
average
year-over-year revenue growth of the
customers that increase price
and probably not too surprising but the
companies that increase price have grown
a lot faster over the last year and the
impact across b2b and b2c
is pretty uh is pretty similar
a live case study that i'm i'm tracking
and i encourage all of you to keep an
eye on is baremetrics
barometrics is a subscription analytics
tool a really solid product
recently rolled out a large pricing
increase
so what they did was and by the way this
is all public they they have a
transparent dashboard where they show
all of their information effectively
increasing their rpu basically doubling
their price points across the board so
what we saw on the average revenue per
user uh is is basically a doubling
and not surprisingly but the mrr sort of
followed suit right so in the near term
it appears to have been highly effective
but we're all asking this question how
is this going to net out in terms of
churn
obviously a or what you would expect was
a one-time uptick and i think it's going
to be really interesting to see where
this normalizes to understand the total
impact that they see but the indications
are really positive um that the increase
the pretty massive increase that they
rolled out is going to be
a creative to that business
you know one of the other thought
leaders that i think is really smart in
the pricing space uh a guy named patrick
mckenzie i think he sums it up the best
for me which is acquisition conversion
and churn often requires significant
cross-functional effort
uh to improve pricing typically requires
replacing a smaller number with a bigger
one
it's not quite that simple but sometimes
it is
so
generally speaking i've seen this time
and time again
there is a strong bias there's a natural
disposition to be risk averse as as we
do not want to disappoint our sales
teams and our customers in raising price
and generally what we are doing there is
we're underestimating willingness to pay
it's a pretty systemic bias and so i'd
encourage you all to consider if you
have some of that in your business uh
and should you be revisiting
so what's going on with inflation right
how should we be thinking about pricing
with regards to inflation um you know
there's a really interesting um
interactive dashboard that can help you
understand inflation by geography it's a
financial times on their website i think
they pull it from refinitive
but i encourage you to go look at it if
you're curious but the point here is
inflation is not consistent across the
world right
and it's an obvious point but we all
need to understand it and internalize it
because it has some pretty meaningful
implications to how we price and you can
see here how they vary across some of
these major markets
not only by geography but also by
industry right we're seeing this in our
daily lives in you know gas prices
versus food etc so the rates of
inflation
are not consistent it's not one size
fits all
so a few things you should be thinking
about uh or might be able to do to
combat the effects of inflation that
i'll go through pretty quickly here so
first is
make sure you're regularly assessing in
some way ideally through a live test the
true willingness to pay
either by geography or by industry or
whatever the segmentation that makes
sense for your business
the second
can you make inflation adjustments
automatic right so if you're in a b2b
enterprise sas business model and you're
doing multi-year agreements do you have
inflation baked into the contracts if
you have them baked in you'd be
surprised at how often people are not
enforcing those so it's worth doing a
spot check audit if you do have
inflation-based increases in your
contracts to go back and make sure that
they're being
upheld
consider pricing positioning for
specific verticals again
inflation is varying across different
industries
one of the things that i think is really
smart and effective is thinking about
your value metric and if it can be
linked in a more clear way to
an inflation metric right so for example
can you price on a percentage of revenue
and then the other thing that you'll see
pretty common is types of surcharge
this is highly dependent on the industry
and the
um you know the the expectations of your
customer base but it can work in in the
example here is is something like uber
right where they're gonna have a fuel
surcharge um in response to the pace of
inflation
a couple of other kind of tactical tips
here um to give you some some
evidence-based impact numbers um
you know are you accepting the right
payment methods
um so
in our research we generally see five to
ten percent left
just on ensuring you're offering the
right preferred
payment methods payment methods vary
around the world
i think i have a bit of a u.s bias
understanding that that is such a large
market and
obviously a more european-centric crowd
here you probably appreciate this more
uh than i do but it was surprising to me
to see that the numbers can jump five to
ten percent by being more uh explicit
and expansive in the product uh payment
methods that you offer localizing price
um so
you can double and this is in a b2c
context right so a lower aov but you can
double your conversion rates uh pretty
consistently if you're localizing the
price that you're displaying and billing
your customers in
the other thing that's really
interesting is there's some some
new research it's not yet conclusive but
billing is the most frequent touch point
we have with our customers
so
making sure that you're making that as
customer friendly and efficient as
possible
is starting to indicate
or become a driver of nps so do you have
a really customer friendly billing
process to make it easy for folks to pay
because if you are you're probably going
to incur you know you're going to
increase your mps and you're also going
to get paid faster right so you there's
kind of two benefits there
so this takeaway here is i think there's
too many companies out there that are
really making it hard for your prospects
to become customers and for your
customers to pay you so reduce the
friction uh
if and and you know when you can
all right so
let's wrap it up with some takeaways um
and you know i think
if i leave you with anything you know
try to capture something on this page
that you can take away and help improve
your business so the first is um you
know pricing is
a lot of things it's more important than
you probably uh realize
it's more complicated
but it's also more solvable
right
second sas gives you an infinite degree
of freedom in how you do your pricing
and packaging
it's really valuable to use this to your
advantage there's some really creative
ways we're seeing this with some really
creative and exciting new usage-based
billing models that are emerging
revisit the assumptions um you know
across sas
we want to leverage all these benefits
and how we go to market and reduce the
friction in adding customers and
retaining customers
you know fundamentally speaking
pricing is about fairness
right
it's an exchange of value
and so ultimately our jobs when we
design a pricing model is to make sure
that this value and price relationship
is on par
pricing in fairness cuts both ways right
if you're giving too much value away in
your product and ultimately your
customers are getting it for a really
cheap bargain or inflation
right is hitting you you're having to
increase salary of your employees etc
your costs are increasing and you're not
able to sort of pass that through to
your customer base in the form of
pricing ultimately that's not fair on
your side as well so really think about
this and the fairness point needs to cut
both ways
you know the fourth thing
you know start the habit of asking these
questions continually
none of our markets are static they're
constantly evolving our pricing models
and our pricing pricing packaging models
they need to consistently evolve
test one thing at a time right a great
habit to get into is develop one
hypothesis
you know stack rank all the hypotheses
you have every quarter pick one thing
that you want to test one one thing a
year even
and that will really help you kind of
get into this habit and start your
evolution to a better pricing model so
you can monetize your business in a in a
more compelling way
and then the last thing is
you know there is this trend that i
believe is starting to really accelerate
which is
b2b buyers right sas buyers are bringing
b2c expectations to work
and what i mean by that is you know in
our personal lives we're we're used to
you know one click checkout so to speak
the seamlessness with which we buy
online order dinner whatever it may be
we're the same people when we show up to
work we don't dramatic we don't
automatically transform into different
people
so how can you make it easy for your
customers to understand your pricing
model and buy from you how can you make
it easy for them to pay you every single
month
we're going to continue to see this
conversion
of b to b and b to c i think the meaning
of those terms is going to continue to
lose
kind of relevance and so think about how
you can make a more b2c like experience
you see this in creative plg models all
the time
and you know good leaders and and good
companies are going to be ahead of the
curve in this way
as we continue to grow so
thanks so much for listening to me
[Music]
you